# 2.2.6 Linking Datasets

Data linking is the process of joining datasets together. Datasets can
be useful on their own but bringing them together can unlock new
insights.

Discussion

- When might this be helpful? Can you think of any examples where joining datasets might help us unlock additional insights?

## Impact on Privacy

Before we link datasets together, we should consider the impact on
privacy of doing so. There can be an increased risk of identification of
a person/entity when two datasets are linked.

## How to Link

The most straightforward way to link datasets is by a deterministic,
rules-based linkage, where records are linked if a specific **set of
identifiers** match. When working with tabular datasets we will often
see this accomplished with a *join* operation.

### Joining in Pandas

Pandas allows for database-style joins. If you have experience of SQL,
you'll be familiar with the terminology of left/right/inner/outer etc.
joins. Pandas makes these join types (or similar) available in the
Pandas API via `pd.merge` and provides a comprehensive summary of joins
[in the
docs](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/user_guide/merging.html#database-style-dataframe-or-named-series-joining-merging).
Here, for demonstration, we will give an example using a simple left
join, similar to a `LEFT OUTER` join in SQL.



```python
import pandas as pd

df1 = pd.DataFrame({'some_id': ['foo', 'bar', 'zop'], 'a': [0,1,2]})
df2 = pd.DataFrame({'some_id': ['foo', 'bar', 'baz'], 'b': [3, 4,5]})

print("df1")
display(df1)

print("df2")
display(df2)
```

    df1



<div>
<style scoped>
    .dataframe tbody tr th:only-of-type {
        vertical-align: middle;
    }

    .dataframe tbody tr th {
        vertical-align: top;
    }

    .dataframe thead th {
        text-align: right;
    }
</style>
<table border="1" class="dataframe">
  <thead>
    <tr style="text-align: right;">
      <th></th>
      <th>some_id</th>
      <th>a</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>0</th>
      <td>foo</td>
      <td>0</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>1</th>
      <td>bar</td>
      <td>1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>2</th>
      <td>zop</td>
      <td>2</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
</div>


    df2



<div>
<style scoped>
    .dataframe tbody tr th:only-of-type {
        vertical-align: middle;
    }

    .dataframe tbody tr th {
        vertical-align: top;
    }

    .dataframe thead th {
        text-align: right;
    }
</style>
<table border="1" class="dataframe">
  <thead>
    <tr style="text-align: right;">
      <th></th>
      <th>some_id</th>
      <th>b</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>0</th>
      <td>foo</td>
      <td>3</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>1</th>
      <td>bar</td>
      <td>4</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>2</th>
      <td>baz</td>
      <td>5</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
</div>




note that `df1` contains the key `'zop'` that is not contained in `df2` and that `df2` contains the key `'baz'` that is not contained in `df1`.
The other two keys (`'foo', 'bar'`) are contained in both DataFrames.



```python
result = pd.merge(left=df1, right=df2, how="left", on="some_id")
display(result)
```


<div>
<style scoped>
    .dataframe tbody tr th:only-of-type {
        vertical-align: middle;
    }

    .dataframe tbody tr th {
        vertical-align: top;
    }

    .dataframe thead th {
        text-align: right;
    }
</style>
<table border="1" class="dataframe">
  <thead>
    <tr style="text-align: right;">
      <th></th>
      <th>some_id</th>
      <th>a</th>
      <th>b</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>0</th>
      <td>foo</td>
      <td>0</td>
      <td>3.0</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>1</th>
      <td>bar</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>4.0</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>2</th>
      <td>zop</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>NaN</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
</div>



the data for `'baz'` has been dropped after this join as it only
appeared on the 'right' side. The `how='left'` join only uses keys from
the left frame. Meanwhile, the entry for column `'b'` is null for key
`'zop'`.

Different scenarios will require different join types, read the docs
carefully!

### Probabilistic Matching

If we don't have a set of common identifiers, we may wish to use
probabilistic matching.

Probabilistic matching calculates a matching score between two records.
Typically, this is done by comparing several field values and assigning
a weight to each depending on how closely they match.

Details of probabilistic matching approaches are, unfortunately, beyond
the scope of this course.
